---
layout: post
title: "Regular Expressions: Simulating an NFA with Rust" 
description: Adventures in Regular Expressions inspired by Russ Cox, implemented in Rust.
summary: A regular expression has an NFA machine that accepts the same set of strings. By transforming the RE into an NFA, it makes it easier to test acceptance, and we can do this in linear space and time.
tags: [compilers, regexp, rust]
---
This is me repeating some of the ideas that Russ Cox writes about [here](), but instead of using C, we're playing around with Rust. From complexity theory, we know that the set of strings a regular expression accepts is identical to the set of strings an NFA accepts, and a DFA accepts. So one way to know whether an input string is accepted by an regular expression, is to construct an NFA machine that accepts the equivalent set of strings as the the regular expression.

This blogpost is my adventure in implementing the algorithm that simulates whether or not a string is accepted by an NFA. The construction from regular expression to NFA is not covered here, but look at the above link to learn more about that process.

---

We want to simulate an NFA by tracking all the states we could be on right now. Despite there being $O(2^N)$ paths to take through the NFA, there can only be $O(N)$ states you can be in at one time. The pathological regexp case Russ Cox focuses on is $a?^na^n$ where he saw exponential time complexity on the default perl, python, ruby regexp matchers (and many more!). The Thompson NFA algorithm we describe has provably linear space with respect to the regexp input length and, linear time when simulating with respect to the input string we're simulating.

- **Linear Space** as each character in the regexp roughly only generates one extra node in our NFA. Our algorithm to simulate the NFA only tracks the nodes we're currently on, and given that this state is bounded by the characters in our input regex, we only have linear state.
- **Linear Time** (ish) given the set of nodes we're currently on, we look at the next character in our input, and use the transition rules encoded in the NFA. The reason why I caveat it with the _ish_ is because it's really `O(|input|*|states|)` as we might be on all nodes in the NFA at once. We can hand-wave and treat `|states|` as a small constant number relative to our input length, so we'll keep it hush hush and say we've got linear time as well.

All there's left to do is implement this in Rust! Look to Russ Cox's C implementation for some background into the next following attempts.

### Attempt 1: Sum Types

```rust
#[derive(PartialEq, Debug)]
pub enum State {
    Next(char, Box<State>),
    Split(Box<State>, Box<State>),
    Accept
}
```
-  Regular expressions that can be modelled using this enum are limited to concatenation, alternation and exact matches. However, because of `Box`, each `State` can only have one parent, and because of this we cannot represent `a*`, `a?`.  This is because there can only be one owner of the `Box` object, if two parents were possible, then the single `Box` would be owned by two places, which can't happen. Multiple parents springs up ideas of `Rc` instead of `Box`, but I found that in this `enum` like setup, that won't work as well.


```rust
impl State {
    pub fn simulate(&self, s: &str) -> bool {
        let mut states: Vec<&State> = vec![self];
        for c in s.chars() {
            states = states.iter()
                .map(|state| State::step(state.clone(), c))
                .flatten()
                .collect::<Vec<&State>>();
        }
        State::is_match(&states)
    }

    fn is_match(states: &Vec<&State>) -> bool {
        states.iter()
            .filter(|state| state != State::Accept)
            .next() != None
    }

    fn step(state: &State, c: char) -> Vec<&State> {
        match state {
            State::Next(id, accept_c, next_state) => if c == *accept_c { vec![next_state] } else { vec![] },
            State::Split(id, up_state, down_state) => {
                let mut up_next = State::step(up_state, c);
                up_next.append(&mut State::step(down_state, c));
                up_next
            },
            State::Accept(id) => vec![],
        }
    }
}
```
- We've already established that the strings that `simulate` can recognise is a strict subset of the strings that Regular Expressions can recognise. However, if the two sets were equal, then this implementation would suffer from state explosion. Suppose we had the NFA for `a*a`, matched against a hundred `a`'s. Each `step` will add the state corresponding to the final, non-optional `a` despite it already being the set of states we could currently be on.
- I admit it's a bit of a contrived example, but that last non optional `a` can be replaced with any sufficiently complicated regular expression, and each step you take would also add duplicate states.
- This is where we use the idea that Cox presents, which is to associate an `id` with every state. This `id` increases by $1$ for every `step` iteration, and we only add a state if we have not yet seen it, i.e. where `id` is not the current `step` iteration `id`. We can model this many ways, but my dumb brain thought it would be best to put this `id` within the structures that represent our state. 
- This, alongside needing to support cycles found in `a*` and `a?`, made me think to keep mutable references to `State` nodes! In retrospect this is definitely not the play -- Rust doesn't allow for more than one live mutable reference to an object!  


### Attempt 2: Mutable References
```rust
#[derive(Debug)]
pub enum State<'a> {
    Next(char, &'a mut StateStep<'a>),
    Split(&'a mut StateStep<'a>, &'a mut StateStep<'a>),
    Accept
}
```
```rust
#[derive(Debug)]
pub struct StateStep<'a> {
    stepid: i32,
    state:  State<'a>,
}
```
- This is similar to the above attempt, but we tag each state with an `id` representing the last iteration we added this state to the current set of states our `simulate` function is on. When we add the state, we can check whether the `stepid` of the state is less than the current iteration number. If this is the case, we know that we haven't yet added it, and we set the `stepid` to the iteration number to avoid adding it back. 
- However this can't work. From last attempt, we saw that we can only have one owner of a `Box`, which stopped us from modelling nodes with two parents. Similarly here, Rust does not allow for two mutable references to the same object that are both live at the same time. Should've seen this one coming, I just replaced mentions to `Box` with `&mut` thinking that it'd work, but they kind of have similar semantics. No bueno.

### Attempt 3: Rc/Weak Containers
- I recall from my C++ course that we used `std::shared_ptr` and `std::weak_ptr` to implement a generic, weighted directed graph. `Rc` and `Weak` are the Rust analogues so I thought how I might use these types considering that my NFA is a graph.
- I can see this working, but then thought -- I'm essentially trying to represent a graph with explicit nodes, versus all the other cool, compact ways I know to represent graphs like edge lists, adjacency matrices, or adjacency lists. If I wanted to do it this. way, then there would be an argument to change over to one of those representations. This would mean the spirit of my first attempt with my `enum` solution would be lost as I encode everything inside one of these graph representations I'm aware of.
- Furthermore, if I was to stay with the `enum` like solution, it wasn't clear which node would own the `Rc` that's used to generate the rest of the `Weak` pointers. It's a space I definitely need to look more into. My last thought on this attempt was to let a `Vec` own all of the `Rc` and then my enum would all use `Weak` pointers to elements in the `Vec`. This still comes back to that whole, can't have two mutable references to a single object! However, a `Vec` owning objects  was interesting... could I move my nodes into the `Vec` and keep a single mutable reference to the `Vec` which will allow me to mutate any node I wanted? In short yes!  

### Final Attempt: Arenas
- Arena is the term I've seen on the interwebs for using a container to own nodes, where it's desirable to have multiple mutable references to other nodes. In this case, we define our nodes entirely in the `Vec` and pass a mutable reference to this `Vec` whenever we want to do any mutating operations on any node.
- Instead of `Box`, `&mut` or `Rc`, outgoing neighbours from a node are represented as indices into this `Vec`. 

```rust
#[derive(Debug)]
pub struct Arena {
    nodes: Vec<StateStep>
}

pub type NodeId = usize;

#[derive(Debug)]
pub struct StateStep {
    stepid: i32,
    state: State
}

#[derive(Debug, PartialEq)]
pub enum State {
    Next(char, NodeId),
    Split(NodeId, NodeId),
    Accept
}
```

```rust
impl Arena {
    pub fn simulate(&mut self, s: &str) -> bool {
        let mut curr_stepid = 1;
        let mut nodes: Vec<NodeId> = vec![0];
        for c in s.chars() {
            nodes = Arena::step(self, &nodes, c, curr_stepid);
            curr_stepid += 1;
        }
        Arena::is_match(&self, &nodes)
    }  

    fn is_match(arena: &Self, nodes: &Vec<NodeId>) -> bool {
        nodes.iter()
            .filter(|id| arena.nodes.get(**id).unwrap().state == StateB::Accept)
            .count() > 0
    }

    fn step(arena: &mut Self, nodes: &Vec<NodeId>, c: char, stepid: i32) -> Vec<NodeId> {
        nodes.iter()
            .map(|id| Arena::step_state(&mut arena.nodes, *id, c, stepid))
            .flatten()
            .collect::<Vec<NodeId>>()
    }

    fn step_state(nodes: &mut Vec<StateStepB>, id: NodeId, c: char, stepid: i32) -> Vec<NodeId> {
        let statestep = nodes.get(id).unwrap();
        if statestep.stepid == stepid {
            return vec![]
        }
        match statestep.state {
            StateB::Next(accept_c, next_id) => {
                let mut next_statestep = nodes.get_mut(next_id).unwrap();
                if c == accept_c && next_statestep.stepid != stepid {
                    next_statestep.stepid = stepid;
                    vec![next_id]
                } else { 
                    vec![]
                }
            },
            StateB::Split(up_id, down_id) => {
                // Use the epsilon jump to explore more reachable nodes in the NFA
                let mut down_nodes = Arena::step_state(nodes, down_id, c, stepid);
                let mut next_nodes = Arena::step_state(nodes, up_id, c, stepid);
                // Postfix assign that we have seen the state.
                nodes.get_mut(up_id).unwrap().stepid = stepid;
                nodes.get_mut(down_id).unwrap().stepid = stepid;
                next_nodes.append(&mut down_nodes);
                next_nodes
            }
            StateB::Accept => vec![],
        }
    }
}
```

### Wrapping Up
If I were to come up with an NFA simulator, I probably would have come up with something that was backed by an adjacency matrix, versus the one that Russ Cox went with here which uses explicit nodes. I really liked the challenge! It was difficult to represent structures with cycles simply because I'm used to programming in languages where there's no constraints on how you use your references, and where mutability is the default and not something you have to opt in for.
Looking back, the last arena based solution is somewhat similar to what you'd implement for an adjacency matrix/list because in those variants the container that owns your nodes would be the 2D matrix / vector of lists respectively.
I'll be continuing to use Rust in my compiler adventures. It's difficult to use, but it's a hell of a lot of fun to learn something so different from my day to day programming at work. 
Also, stay tuned for a Julia + Algorithms post. I'm working casually through MIT's 6.046 and want to give Julia more of a try after MIT's Introduction to Computational Thinking 18.S191.
